Blog post for semantic search frontend launch (#458)
freelawproject/free.law: posts/2026/04/30/semantic-search-on-courtlistener.mdx

---

> title: "Semantic Search Is Now on CourtListener!"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Semantic Search Is Now on CourtListener"
```

date: "2026-04-30"
tags:
 - "Free Law Project"
 - "CourtListener"
 - "Case Law"
 - "Artificial Intelligence"
 - "Semantic Search"
 - "AI"
author: "Rachel Gao"
excerpt: "Search case law using natural language, right from CourtListener. Semantic search is now live on the website!"
---

<p className="lead">Semantic search has arrived on CourtListener—you can now search case law using natural language, directly from the website.</p>

> Last November, we [launched semantic search through our API][api-post], bringing a new way to find case law by meaning rather than exact keywords. The natural next step was to make this powerful search available to everyone on the website—no API required.

Reviewer: Can't say "natural" in this way on this page without confusing people. So:

```suggestion
Last November, we [launched semantic search through our API][api-post], bringing a new way to find case law by meaning rather than exact keywords. The next step we're taking today is to make this powerful search available to everyone on the website—no API required.
```

> Today, we're thrilled to announce that semantic search is now available on [CourtListener][cl]!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thousands of users place hundreds of thousands of searches on our website each day. We can't wait to see how this new feature enhances research on the  [CourtListener][cl] platform!
```

[api-post]: /2025/11/05/semantic-search-api/
[cl]: https://www.courtlistener.com/

## What Is Semantic Search?

<RightInfoBox border={true}>
  <h3 className="mt-2 mb-2">How It Works</h3>
  <p className="my-0">An encoder machine learning model, fine-tuned for information retrieval, represents legal opinions as embeddings (high-dimensional numbers) that capture their semantic meaning. When you submit a query, the same model translates it into embeddings, and an approximate nearest neighbor algorithm identifies opinions with the most semantically similar meanings.</p>
  <p className="my-0">For a detailed comparison of keyword versus semantic search, check out our help page on [Citegeist][cg].</p>
  <PurpleButton href="https://www.courtlistener.com/">Try It Now</PurpleButton>
</RightInfoBox>

> Traditional keyword search requires you to use exact words in searching for an opinion. Semantic search leverages the **meaning and intent** behind your query, surfacing relevant precedents even when they use different terminology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traditional keyword search requires that your query contain the exact same words as an opinion for it to turn up. Semantic search takes a different approach by leveraging the **meaning and intent** of your query. This surfaces relevant decisions even when they use different terminology than your query.
```

For example, a keyword search for "tenant evicted for having a dog" will only match opinions containing those exact words. A semantic search for the same query can also find cases about "landlord removed renter for violating pet policy"—because the meaning is the same.

[cg]: https://www.courtlistener.com/help/citegeist/

### Hybrid Search

> Sometimes you need the precision of keywords with the flexibility of natural language. With **hybrid search**, you can combine both—just wrap your must-have terms in quotation marks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you need to combine the precision of keywords with the flexibility of natural language. With **hybrid search**, you can—just wrap your must-have terms in quotation marks.
```

> For example: *"Fourth Amendment" unreasonable search of a student's phone at school*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example: 

> "Fourth Amendment" unreasonable search of a student's phone at school
```

Author: Updated, had to use an HTML block to avoid extra set of quotation marks surrounding the text.
